source:KINGDOM OF MOROCCO MINISTRY OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS AFRICAN COOPERATION AND MOROCCAN EXPATRIATES
url:https://au.diplomatie.ma/en/moroccan-sahara

The question of the Moroccan Sahara remains one of the oldest conflicts in contemporary history due to the overlapping interests of the parties to the conflicts. Unfortunately, there are many illusions about the Moroccan Sahara conflict which hinder the understanding of the truth and realities of the conflict making it difficult to properly read the parameters of the conflicts and to find a solution for it.

Unlike any other African country, during the colonial period, Morocco was divided by colonial powers into several zones (protectorates and colonies) administered by France (center) and Spain (north and south) while the city of Tangier was an international zone, administered by 12 powers.

In 1956, Morocco started to recover its territorial integrity gradually and through negotiated international agreements. France and Spain retroceded the central and northern zones to Morocco. In 1958, an Agreement was concluded by virtue of which Morocco recovered the city of Tarfaya; Sidi Ifni was recovered by Morocco in 1969 and the Spanish army retreated from the Sahara in 1975, right after Moroccan population conducted a peaceful “green march” to liberate its territories from Spain.

The Sahara issue is not a mere item on the agenda of the UN Security Council but rather represents a historical injustice done to Morocco in the recovery of its territorial integrity. In fact, during the Spanish colonial period, Morocco was the only country to claim the territory at the international level (UN decolonization committee in 1963), while the polisario did not exist at all. This entity was created months prior to the withdrawal of Spain from the Sahara region, in February 1976, by Algeria using its diplomatic, military and financial assets, in a context marked by the Cold War.

With Algeria's assistance, polisario set up headquarters in Tindouf (Algeria). An armed fight took place between 1975 and 1991, year of the proclamation of the cease-fire, following the UN Security Council Resolution 690, by which the United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara (MINURSO) was established. Hence, the question of the Moroccan Sahara has always been on the agenda of the Security Council under Chapter 6 of the UN Charter on the peaceful settlement of disputes, as a regional dispute.

Faced with the difficulties hovering over the United Nations settlement plan, and over the process of identifying persons entitled to participate in the referendum, the UN adopted resolution 1309 on July 25, 2000, which underlines the importance of proposing a political solution as one of the options which could be accepted by the parties concerned, and which could overcome the problems encountered by the referendum process, particularly in terms of identification. Finally, the UN was convinced of the failure and the impossibility of organising the referendum.

Since then, the Security Council no longer mentions either the settlement plan or the referendum contained therein in any of these resolutions adopted since 2001. The referendum option has been irrevocably abandoned, for almost two decades, by the international community and legality which are focused exclusively on the prospects of a political solution.

In 2007 and after the situation ended in stalemate, Morocco presented an autonomy project, which is the result of a consultation process at national and local levels with the involvement of all Moroccan forces, elected , Sahrawi citizens through the Advisory Council for Saharan Affairs (CORCAS).

Not only the Moroccan autonomy Initiative enjoys the full support of the population of the Moroccan Sahara but the international community, also supports it to solve this issue according to the Security Council demand to find political, realistic, pragmatic, lasting and accommodating solution.